This post has been in the workshop a long time. I only just started this draft, but the workshop is my life. There are things I have discovered that I wish to share but I hesitate, because I know that speaking from pain and bitterness tends to twist the message, and it is to the message I wish to be true.

I don’t have very much friendship in my life, but I have a lot of antifriendship. I know that it isn’t just me, it is in the air we breathe. It is a thick cloud of toxic fumes that we choke on but can’t see. Maybe I see it a little better than others because I was not raised in this culture. For most of my early education, I wasn’t allowed to learn with the other kids because my parents feared I may hear things they do not agree with. The first time I stepped into Chaparral High was in 11th grade and the smoke came billowing out the doors next to the gymnasium like anger and shame.

It was a surreal day, but the most surreal moment came just before lunch. I was walking down the large staircase in the expansive main hall to the lunch room and I could see a large circle of kids below me. They were buzzing with excitement and I could see something was happening. Everyone was laughing and pointing and in the middle were two kids fighting. 

It seemed like an unlikely pair to be fighting, it was a smaller boy and a girl. One was following the other around in circles and occasionally kicking, the other was defending the kicks and trying to strike back with punches. They both looked very unhappy, like they were having one of the worst days of their lives. But what really stuck with me is how nobody was doing anything to help. It was clear to me that they did not want to be fighting and that all it would take was someone to step in and stand between them for a moment and it would be over. So that’s what I did, and over it was. They both seemed grateful. I heard that they were both in junior high and they were actually friends, although I don’t recall hearing what started the fight that got them stuck in such an unhappy moment together.

What haunts me about that memory is the ability for people to stand in witness of true suffering and do nothing to help, even sometimes to point and laugh and enjoy it. I had seen nothing like it up until that point, but I have seen many examples since, and I have never gotten used to it. It is all around, it is more American than apple pie, and I believe we are in the late stages of its pathology. What comes next, if we are unable to heal, is something that nobody wants.

My high school story is full of episodes like that, where I come across something confusing and troubling that everyone else seems used to, something that my years of faithful homeschooling could have never prepared me for, and try to respond, often to mixed results. This was back in the 90s, when non-conformity was still sometimes respected and celebrated, before “weird” became a bad thing again. But as a non-conformist, I was always a reluctant one. Most of the time I desperately wanted to fit in, I just didn’t know how. It was only on rare occasion that I refused.

You see, as dark as this new world outside my home could sometimes be, the world that I came from was much darker. My world at home was full of abuse and shame and religious extremes. I woke up each morning to my mother’s manic singing and my father’s silent rage or indifference. I was expected to do chores and when my siblings and I became overweight we had to go out and run in the cold weather, past all the kids getting on the bus to go to school. This was our “physical education,” you see, and it was also about building character. Then we’d eat breakfast and my father would gruffly stomp out the door to work and we’d get started with our morning classes. We would spend about an hour together on some history lesson or religious teachings and then we’d break out into solo study, which is where I spent most of my day, alone.

My mother taught me how to read and write, and not a whole lot else that was very useful. We learned a great deal about “creation science” and a very particular version of American history. Our curriculum was meticulously planned by my mother and most of it came from christian publishers. I was also expected to learn math, but my mother did not know how to teach it, and what I really learned was how to find the answers some other way. 

I had a little wooden desk that could open up and fit a lot of books inside, and I wished that I could fit inside too. We bought it second-hand and on the bottom of the wooden lid someone had carved a little swastika that I turned into a crosshairs and I pretended I was in a cockpit, in a dogfight with the Red Baron. I spent a lot of time reading my own books and learning how to use the computers in our basement, an 8088, 386, and later a 486SX running at 25 MHz and with a 28.8 kilobaud modem. Learning computers was not easy on my own and we had no books to help, it was the longest time before I could get MS-DOS to say anything back to me besides “Bad command or file name.” 

I had a ritual at the end of each day. At 4pm, I’d sit on the little yellow couch in front of the front window, peering out at the neighborhood street. That is when the buses would start to pass, carrying all the kids who were just arriving home from school. I wondered what it would be like to arrive home from school, to be somewhere else during the day, and wished so strongly that I could join them. 

When I finally got the chance to join them, in 9th grade, I was excited. I made friends easily, although keeping friendships was harder. This was the 90s, and most of the personality that I knew how to express to other kids revolved around music. Alternative, punk, and ska, staples of suburban America at that time. Denver had a new radio station at 93.3 MHz FM and it was where I tuned into my own personal religion, and it was a much happier and loving religion than the one that I inherited. We had a rock station before that, 106.7, but it’s particular brand of edginess just seemed mean and crude to me most of the time, and the new station struck a tone of acceptance and kindness. 

I’ve always been weird about the rules, part-time rebel and part-time reverent. More than anything, I wish to know what the rules are, maybe because consequences at my home could come swift and scary. I hated the rules that were just about control, and there were lots of them. But I also recognized the value rules can bring, most importantly the rules about how we treat each other, and wished very much those rules could also be a part of my home life. I think this fascination with the rules that sometimes made me seem odd to my friends. Because any kind of social situation has its own rules, usually unspoken, my least favorite kind. While everyone else was learning these rules, I was dogfighting with the Red Baron, so I run up against them sometimes without trying.

My first big clash with rules came in 9th grade. Chaparral High was not my first high school, it was my third. The first school I went to was a christian private school called Jim Elliott, and it was here that I experienced my first antifriendship. 

One thing that my mother did not understand about the value of school that has other kids and other teachers is that they offer a way to learn some of the things that our parents can’t teach us, because they never learned themselves. They say it takes a village to raise a child, this is why. When we have a chance to know many kinds of people and learn from many teachers and friends, we are given many examples of how to live that can guide us through the unique paths that life offers us.

Some of the rules I struggled against were about sexuality. There was one rule about sexuality in my home: don’t. As I navigated relationships with girls and girlfriends, I recognized that this rule wasn’t about me or my best interests, and yet I also recognized that without any rules I could easily be hurt or hurt someone else, and I searched for a better understanding.

Jim Sawyer, or Mr. Jim as he was known to his students, was a kind and good man. Once, after class, I opened up to him about me and my girlfriend and the ways that we had explored our sexuality. It was all very innocent and it felt right to me, and I wanted to know that it wasn’t wrong or sinful. I told him everything, and he told me that he didn’t think it was wrong, that sexuality was good and beautiful, something I understood but needed to hear. He was the first adult that listened to me and offered me a perspective with balance, that gave me the freedom to grow in ways that I still needed to grow.

Jim Elliott High had a dress code on Wednesdays when they held chapel. The boys must wear nice clothes, the same that you might wear to church, which meant no jeans or t-shirts. I hated this dress code because I did not have any clothes that quite seemed to fit, and I was always getting my card punched for violations. They were similar to the cards that might earn you a free coffee at Starbucks, but in this case, they only earned me reprimands and trips to see the principal of the school, a tall disciplinarian named Mrs. Keith. I remember she had a low voice that dripped with hostility and sensitivity to perceived challenges to her authority, and I wondered how someone who seemed to dislike kids so much took a job that forced her to deal with them.

Jim Elliott had a strict code of conduct. No tardiness, no physical contact with other students, among others. There was an air of fear and repression in the hallways between classes. I can still hear the sound of my card being punched and the stern looks from teachers who sometimes seemed to enjoy it. I was a good kid who wanted to follow the rules, I was just never quite sure that these were the rules I wanted to follow, and for good reason. In any case, I was also a teenager with a developing frontal lobe, faced with the natural challenge of impulse control in a very different environment with different expectations than those I faced at home, some that made sense and some that didn’t. 

I was on my third or fourth card when I became very reflective about the nature of rules, particularly the one about the dress code on Wednesdays. I wrote up a petition that made a case for a more lenient policy, it centered around how the God of the Bible was supposedly one that wanted us to come and worship as we are, a God that could not be very concerned about something so superficial as the clothes we wear. It must have been compelling, because the majority of my fellow students and even some teachers signed it. I thought I was responding in a healthy way, but I still remember the moment in English Literature that I was called up to see the principal and sent home for the rest of the week merely for starting the petition. 

I was suspended and only allowed to return the next week on strict probation. The next time that I stepped out of line, and step out of line I did, I was expelled. 

I remember the hearing where they discussed my behavioral problems. I remember getting the feedback that I sat with a spirit of defiance throughout this hearing, and I remember being surprised that is how I came across. I thought for sure, Mr. Jim, the only teacher who really knew me, the one who encouraged that I use my voice when we were in private, would stick up for me. Maybe he did, maybe he didn’t, but he didn’t in my presence, during that hearing. He also did not follow up and check in with me as I faced the challenges of an entirely different school the next semester, perhaps he did not see it as his role. I am still grateful for the good council he gave, but he was an unsteady mentor and an unreliable friend, only offering the appearance of friendship, and not when it mattered most.

The next semester, I attended Ponderosa High, and it was a better school experience in many ways. By now I had the spirit of an outcast, but as it turns out, outcasts are quite common in American high schools. I was a strange sort of outcast, anyone could see I was a good kid, with an easy friendship that I offered to everyone I talked to, just unsteady and shy. I had my own sense of style, I made my own jewelry from beads and leather that I found at Hobby Lobby. Staying true to my own style has always been important to me, because I struggle with feeling good about how I look that goes back a long way, to the dark spirit that I faced at home. I learned from an early age that if I feel good about something that I am wearing, that is enough, as strange as it may seem to others.

I have tried to write this story a few times before. I am trying again now partly because of something my new therapist said yesterday. She told me that many of her clients are struggling with some version of loneliness, that there seems to be something amiss in the social fabric of America. She attributes it to the aftermath of the pandemic, a time when isolation became necessary but came with consequences from which we have yet to fully heal. Her sentiments are also reflected in the statements of our Surgeon General, who has warned of a loneliness epidemic in our country.

I decided to seek therapy partly because I saw a meme about how men will do just about anything instead of going to therapy, and I sheepishly recognized that it describes me to some degree. I have always understood the value of therapy, I have even worked as a therapist myself. I know that we all need someone to talk to, someone to be in our corner as we grapple with the messy parts of our lives. I think that in other times and in other cultures, this was the role of friendship. Now we pay someone a hundred dollars an hour to give us the opportunity to be fully human with someone who isn’t going to judge us. This is not a criticism of therapists, who are doing the lord’s work, but I also believe the field of mental health as a whole has failed to guide us through this moment, and my experience offers clues about the dysfunction within these institutions.

As I mentioned, I worked as a therapist, and by all accounts I was a good one. I was a Ph.D student in the Health Psychology program at the University of Colorado Denver. I had several clients that I had the honor to work with, sometimes they were other students at UCDenver, sometimes members of the larger community. I also taught Introduction to Psychology to a huge class of incoming freshmen, and Research Methods. It feels like another life, now, and in some ways it was a very good life. I was newly married and we were both students, we would ride the city bus along Colfax to school each day, poking at our laptops, working on research papers and studying for tests.

For better or for worse, we rely on the field of psychology to help us understand our experience as human creatures navigating an ever changing world with ever changing demands. The life of a grad student is an odd mixture of privilege and poverty. We are granted the role of therapists and teachers and all the responsibilities that those trusted roles entail, and none of the safeguards that the faculty mentors enjoy. These lack of safeguards had devastating consequences for me and nearly all of the students who entered the program in the same year, as well as others. 

Looking back, I have come to see it as institutionalized antifriendship. 

The inhumanity in how they treat their students is certainly not reflected in their recruitment materials. They advertise the department as a supportive environment, like a family, and to students like me this is a very appealing message. At the time, it was a brand new program, gaining accreditation the year I was enrolled. They had the difficult job of building relationships with internships and externships from which students would gain the vital experience they need to grow as therapists and mental health researchers. But perhaps our faculty were not up to the challenge, and one by one the students in my cohort decided to leave this program and work that they had spent so many years of investment. I knew them all as incredibly gifted students. 

As an example of ways that the leadership in the department could have stepped in and made a difference, one of my internships involved neuropsychological assessment at the Anschutz campus. Although all of my feedback was very positive and there were no issues with the performance of my role, part of the way through they decided that my insurance which was provided by the state of Colorado would not be sufficient to cover me if I somehow got hurt on the job doing the dangerous work of administering neuropsychological testing. They said I could not continue unless I attained better insurance. This expense was far out of our ability to afford, and I was at an impasse. The months of investment were a loss, and I would need to try again the next semester. The department offered no solution. 

I interviewed at another internship at Anschutz working with cancer patients, and they refused the position without explanation. These internships are an important part of our education, and it was as if the year was a wash. My therapist yesterday offered a helpful reflection, when we are struggling with our own mental health difficulties, it becomes nearly impossible to help someone else. I didn’t recognize it at the time as a lack of support, I believed I simply was not up to the task under the current circumstances. I was also facing difficulty in my marriage, partly due to the financial stress of living on a meager stipend, our only income for a time.

With very little support from the department to keep going, I took a year off to work on something else for a time. During this time, my wife was going through her own uncertainty with her life and career and decided to leave our marriage, her band, and virtually all her friends to start a new life. I was alone again and facing a mountain of depression. I believe I still held a lot of promise as a researcher and a therapist, but I struggled to believe in myself. This is a moment when a mentor can do wonders to help us rebuild our confidence to keep going. When I reached out to a long time mentor in the program, someone for whom I had spent years helping out in her research lab, the only response that I got was a short email saying that “we are all rooting for you” and nothing else.

It is funny, because the very first thing they told us when we started the program was how hard it could get as graduate students, the stresses that we will face and the importance of self-care and social networks to sustain us. They also recognize that we will not have the time to invest in maintaining these vital connections outside of the program, that the program will be like our family in many ways. They stress the importance of eliciting support when we need it. When I elicited that support, none was forthcoming. They did, however, ask me to officially withdraw from program, saying it would be in my own best interest and I could pick it up again later. I trusted their advice and did as they requested, although I am unclear now how this was in my best interest. I believe, as always, it was only in their interest.

Years later, after I had worked through my depression, I did try to seek a renewed relationship with the program. They treated me like a stranger and told me their hands were tied, it had been too long since I was initially enrolled. I accepted this but wished to know how they looked back at the difficulties that were faced by me and my fellow students. I was shocked to find out that no followup and been conducted with the other students either, no lessons apparently learned. I pressed them on the importance of understanding their own role in the hardships faced by their own students, and I have yet to receive a response. The last I heard, they were still considering followup interviews with students who have not completed the program, and I have learned that several others have also withdrawn for “personal reasons.” But as yet, these interviews are not being conducted. They are still advertising the program to prospective students as being “like a family.” 

Prospective students, be warned. 

I want to acknowledge the ongoing mentorship of Jim Grigsby. Unlike the rest of the department, he has responded with ongoing friendship and helpful advice, and long past the moment when it was officially part of his role. I know that he has pushed for changes but has himself been marginalized by the department. I also want to acknowledge Barbara Walker, who wrote me a letter expressing regret for the difficulties faced by my cohort and the apparent lack of support that we received. However, the general response from the department has been silence. I think grad students of many different kinds face similar problems and lack of support, and the entire institution of graduate study is problematic. I think it is fair to hold a psychology department, who are in a unique position to recognize what is at stake and how it can go wrong, to a higher standard. 

I will continue to seek answers, not just for myself, but for the sake of past, current, and future students. Among other things, I wish to know how they have reported their attrition rates to accreditation bodies, who take the matter seriously.

It is small wonder to me that we struggle as a society with loneliness and responding to suffering with humanity when these are the people we trust to guide us.

I have used the word antifriendship a few times and now I’d like to describe it. Friendship is among our highest values as a society, we all like to think of ourselves as a good friend to the people in our lives. We recognize the need for support and togetherness, for the role it plays in our wellbeing. We are, at our core, social creatures, and we certainly aren’t the only ones.

Aurora, CO is blessed with a vibrant prairie dog population. Sometimes I go for a walk along the Highline Canal, a trail that runs throughout Denver. On these walks I see deer and foxes and hawks and prairie dogs. The indigenous people who have called this place home long before Europeans started to settle here believed in the wisdom that nature offers us. I believe the Prairie Dog Spirit offers a unique lesson that we might learn from.

If you walk by a prairie dog town, the first thing you might notice is the barking. Prairie dogs bark a warning when they see a potential threat, this is partly for the benefit of other prairie dogs who might not yet be aware. In a world of predators and threats, they rely on the presence of other prairie dogs to maintain their sense of safety. If we could interview a prairie dog, and perhaps someday we will be able to, I would not be surprised to find that the the barks are not just a practical response to the moment, but also offer some level of psychological comfort. Perhaps each bark is a prairie dog’s way of saying, “ey, I got your back brother.”

Sometimes they gather together near their holes. I have literally seen prairie dogs hugging, and it fills my heart. 

The Human Spirit is not so different. We need the presence of others for the same essential psychological needs. We don’t usually bark at each other, but it might take the form of calling each other up from time to time, especially when we know our friends are out there dealing with challenges. 

We live in a unique cultural environment that values personal independence and self-sufficiency, achievement and status. Depending on others, needing to talk to someone, seeking out affirmation and encouragement has become like a sign of weakness. This used to be particularly true for men, and now that it just seems generally true for everyone, we are even worse off. These are the benefits of friendship, so how does friendship survive in this situation? The answer: not very well.

I am someone who has always relied on my friends maybe a little more than prescribed by our cultural philosophy. This is partly because I had a very late start in developing healthy human connections, and partly because I never saw interpersonal dependence or asking for help as a weakness but as a strength. I never saw the value of doing everything by myself, of being an island, maybe because that was essentially my entire emotional life growing up, and I see how lonely it can get. 

There are three kinds of suffering. There is suffering we endure alone, maybe because we do not have friends or because we are too proud to let anyone know we are hurting. It is a dark and lonely place, and it is deeply regrettable because the comfort that another human being can provide can be such a relief, and it is so easy to give. We don’t have to fix someone’s problems, we just need to send the message they are not alone. When sincere and true, this kind of friendship is like feeling the warmth of the sun on your face after a dark and lonely night. It nurtures a feeling of hope and strength from within that can sustain us through anything we might face.

As bad as suffering alone can be, there is a darker kind of suffering, and that is suffering in the presence of other people who could help but for whatever reason, choose not to. This kind of suffering is truly dehumanizing. It sends the message that not only are we alone, we are unworthy of help. We feel as if there must be something utterly wrong and ugly inside us, that others would turn away. At our core, we understand this darkness, and it is often why we are afraid to ask for help.

In my life, I have spent too much time alone, not because I wanted to but because I have at times reached out in my pain only to have someone I thought was a friend look away, to send the message, “no, you are on your own.” This is antifriendship. I have received it from family and friends.

Lest I sound as if I am speaking from a place of superiority, I should add that I can think of times where I was essentially the antifriend. Recognizing a situation where someone just needs a friend to listen, to know that we are there, it isn’t always easy, and we deal with a world of distractions and other demands on our times. That, too, is very human. But I have always tried to be open to these moments.

I understand the impulse to look away from suffering. The human experience can be messy. We might not always feel up to the task of dealing with a grown man or woman who is crying or expressing an intense emotion. Especially in our culture where we see it as a weakness, where the emotional prescription is stoicism. It might also hit too close to home, and the prospect of helping them bear their emotions bring up emotions in ourselves that we would prefer to avoid. We might feel as if they are not dealing with their own problems properly or like they are asking us to fix the problem when all they needed was someone to talk to.

Gratefully, there is another kind of suffering, although one that we have lost touch with as a culture. That is suffering that we do in the presence of others that respond with compassion and humanity. Rather than a weakness and a burden, it can help us form bonds that let us come through the experience with an even stronger sense of wellbeing than what we had before. 

I suppose in a lot of ways, I have fallen through the cracks. The only way I know how to respond is to keep going and to offer kindness and friendship to anyone around me who might seem to need it. 

When I’m traveling around town with my guitar, people reach out to me, sometimes with direct request for help or just a casual conversation that leads to something deeper. I must have the look of someone who will be easy to talk to, and it is true. It might sound strange, but some of the best interactions I have are with complete strangers. People who open up to me waiting for the bus, or people who stop to talk to me in between songs. One of the reasons I go out to play guitar, even though I am not a strong musician, is to have these connections. They actually do sustain me, and they seem to mean a lot to the people I come into contact with as well. We are all in this together.

Even under the best of circumstances, this life can be desperately lonely sometimes. The best way that we can spend our time is on this dusty planet is to help a friend or even a complete stranger know that they are not alone. If you happen to know me or even if you don’t, and you need someone to talk to, know that there is no kind of suffering that I will look away from. 

Spirit of the Prairie Dog, please guide us.
